---
authors: DC
---

# Parallelism for the ground state using wavelets  

## Boron cluster, alkane molecule...  

This tutorial explains how to run the calculation of an isolated system using a
wavelet basis-set on a parallel computer using MPI. You will learn the
different characteristics of a parallel run using the wavelet basis-set and
test the speed-up on a small boron cluster of 14 atoms followed by a test on a
bigger alkane molecule.

This tutorial should take about 90 minutes and requires you have several CPU
cores (up to 64).

You are supposed to know already some basics of parallelism in ABINIT,
explained in the tutorial [A first introduction to ABINIT in parallel](basepar).

## 1 Wavelets variables and parallelism
  
The parallelism with the wavelet formalism can be used for two purposes: to
reduce the memory load per node, or to reduce the overall computation time.

The MPI parallelization in the wavelet mode relies on the orbital distribution
scheme, in which the orbitals of the system under investigation are
distributed over the assigned MPI processes. This scheme reaches its limit
when the number of MPI processes is equal to the number of orbitals in the
simulation. To distribute the orbitals uniformly, the number of processors
must be a factor (divisor) of the number of orbitals. If this is not the case,
the distribution is not optimal, but the code tries to balance the load over
the processors. For example, if we have 5 orbitals and 4 processors, the
orbitals will have the distribution: 2/1/1/1.

There are no specific input variables to use the parallelism in the wavelet
mode as the only parallelisation level is on orbitals. So running ABINIT with
an `mpirun` command is enough (this command differs according to the local MPI
implementation) such as:
    
    mpirun -np Nproc abinit < infile > logfile

For further understanding of the wavelet mode, or for citation purposes, one
may read [[cite:Genovese2008]]

## 2 Speed-up calculation for a boron cluster
  
We propose here to determine the speed-up in the calculation of the total
energy of a cluster made of 14 boron atoms. Open the file `tgswvl_01.in`. It
contains first the definition of the wavelet basis-set. One may want to test
the precision of the calculation by varying the [[wvl_hgrid]] and
[[wvl_crmult]] variables. This is not the purpose of this tutorial, so we will
use the given values (0.45Bohr and 5).

{% dialog tests/tutoparal/Input/tgswvl_01.in  %}

Run ABINIT with 3 processors. The overall time is printed at the end of the
output file (and of the log):
    
    Proc.   0 individual time (sec): cpu=        172.6  wall=        172.6

Read the output file to find the number of orbitals in the calculation (given
by the keyword [[nband]]). With the distribution scheme of the wavelet mode,
the best distribution over processors will be obtained for, 1, 3, 7 and 21
processors. Create four different directories (with the number of processors
for instance) and run four times ABINIT with the same input file, varying the
number of processors in {1, 3, 7, 21}. The speed-up is the ratio between the
time with one processor and the time of a run with N processors.

Assuming that the directories are called {01, 03, 07, 21}, one can grep the
over-all time of a run and plot it in gnuplot with:
    
    plot "< grep 'individual time' */log | tr '/' ' '" u 1:(ttt/$11) w lp t "Boron cluster", x t "Ideal speed-up"

where `ttt` represents the time on one processor. The efficiency (in percent)
of the parallelization process is the ratio between the speed-up and the
number of processors. One can plot it with:
    
    plot "< grep 'individual time' */log | tr '/' ' '" u 1:(ttt/$11/$1*100) w lp t "Boron cluster"

The first conclusion is that the efficiency is not so good when one use one
orbital per processor. This is a general rule with the wavelet mode: due to
the implementation, a good balance between speed and efficiency is obtained
for two orbitals per processor. One can also see that the efficiency generally
decreases with the number of processors.

This system is rather small and the amount of time spent in the overhead (read
the input file, initialise arrays...) is impacting the performance. Let's see
how to focus on the calculation parts.

## 3 Time partition

The wavelet mode is generating a `time.prc` file at each run (warning: it will
erase any existing copy). This is a text file and can be read directly. There
are three sections, giving the time of the initialisation process (before
entering the SCF loop), the time of the SCF loop itself, and the time for the
post-processing. Let's have a closer look to the SCF section (the actual
figures will vary between runs and number of processors):
    
     CATEGORY          mean TIME(sec)       PERCENT
    CrtLocPot                1.70E-01        0.018
    ApplyLocPotKin           1.83E+02       19.865
    ApplyProj                1.44E+00        0.156
    Precondition             3.42E+02       37.055
    Rho_comput               1.10E+02       11.926
    Rho_commun               5.45E+00        0.591
    Un-TransSwitch           5.37E+00        0.582
    Un-TransComm             5.95E+00        0.645
    GramS_comput             6.84E+01        7.417
    GramS_commun             8.91E-02        0.010
    LagrM_comput             1.36E+02       14.784
    LagrM_commun             1.44E-01        0.016
    Diis                     1.41E+01        1.527
    PSolv_comput             2.31E+01        2.508
    PSolv_commun             3.31E+00        0.358
    Exchangecorr             5.01E+00        0.543
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total CPU time for category: WFN_OPT = 9.22E+02  Total categorized percent  98.0
    

With the total time of this SCF section, one can compute the speed-up and the
efficiency of the wavelet mode more accurately:
    
      N processors   Speed-up  Efficiency (%)
           3           2.3        75.3
           7           3.7        52.8
          21           7.5        35.6
    
With the percentages of the `time.prc` file, one can see that, for this
example, the time is mostly spent in the precondionner and the application of
the local part of the Hamiltonian on the wavefunctions. Let's categorise the
time information:

  * The communication time is the sum of all the `_commun` entries and the `Un-TransComm` one.
  * The time spent doing convolutions is the sum of `Precondition, ApplyLocPotKin, Rho_comput`.
  * The linear algebra part is the sum of `GramS_comput, LagrM_comput`.
  * The other entries are in a miscellaneous category.

By doing the summations, one can give the percentage per category during the SCF loop:
    
     CATEGORY       mean TIME(sec)       PERCENT
    Communication       14.9               1.62
    Convolutions       635.0              68.87
    Linear algebra     204.4              21.17
    Other               67.7               7.34
    
You can analyse all the time.prc that have been generated for the different
number of processors and see the evolution of the different categories.

## 4 Orbital parallelism and array parallelism
  
If the number of processors is not a divisor of the number of orbitals, there
will be some processors with fewer orbitals than others. This is not the best
distribution from an orbital point of view. But, the wavelet mode also
distributes the scalar arrays like density and potentials by z-planes in real
space. So some parts of the code may become more efficient when used with a
bigger number of processors, like the Poisson Solver part for instance.

Run the boron example with {2, 4, 14, 15} processors and plot the speed-up.
One can also look at the standard output to the load balancing of the Poisson
Solver and the load balancing of orbitals (with 15 processors):
    
    [...]
     Processes from 0 to 9 treat 2 orbitals 
     Processes from 10 to 10 treat 1 orbitals 
     Processes from 11 to 14 treat 0 orbitals 
    [...]
     Load Balancing for Poisson Solver related operations:
     LB_density        : processors   0  - 13 work at 100%
                         processor      14   works at  40%
      LB_kernel        : processors   0  - 12 work at 100%
                         processor      13   works at  92%
                         processors  14  - 14 work at   0%
    
One can see that, as expected, the load balancing per orbital is bad (4
processors are doing nothing), but one can see also that the load balancing of
the scalar arrays is not so good since the last processor will have a reduced
array. It is thus useless to run this job at 15 processors, 14 will give the
same run time (since the load balancing will be better).

## 5 Speed-up calculation on a 65-atom alkane
  
Let's do the same with a bigger molecule and a finer grid. Open the file
`tgswvl_02.in`. It contains the definition of an alkane chain of 65 atoms,
providing 64 orbitals. 

{% dialog tests/tutoparal/Input/tgswvl_02.in %}

Run this input file with {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64} processors. 
The run with one processor should take less than one hour. If
the time is short, one can reduce [[wvl_hgrid]] in the input file to 0.45.

![Speedup for the C21H44 alkane chain](paral_gswvl_assets/speedup-C21.png) 
![Efficiency for the C21H44 alkane chain](paral_gswvl_assets/efficiency-C21.png)
![Time repartition for the C21H44 alkane chain](paral_gswvl_assets/time-C21.png)
_Time measurements for a run over several processors of a C 21H44 alkane chain_

As we obtained previously, the efficiency is generally lowered when the number
of processors is not a divisor of the number of orbitals (namely here 24 and 48).

## 6 Conclusion
  
With the wavelet mode, it is possible to efficiently decrease the run time by
increasing the number of processors. The efficiency is limited by the increase
of amount of time spent in the communications. The efficiency increases with
the quality of the calculation: the more accurate the calculations are (finer
hgrid...), the more efficient the code parallelization will be.
